--- 
layout: default
title: Learning Studios Distribution of Free Software for Schools
description: A Project of Gnowledge Lab of HBCSE, TIFR
---
<!---{% include menu.html %}--->

![Learning Studios DVD distribution](https://metastudio.org/uploads/default/original/2X/2/242f2bc7d543254c36a9a9aa7c5b89d5147ed387.jpeg)

Most mainstream software for education was meant to deliver content to
the student or help the teacher deliver the content. The carefully
curated learning studios packaged by the lab into a DVD do not fall in
that category of software. These are platforms for producers and not
consumers, consistent with the constructionist philosophy adopted by
the lab. They support doing, designing, creating, constructing,
sharing, displaying, and composing culture including language, art,
science, mathematics and technology.  The software bundled inside is
itself created collaboratively by thousands of passionate geeks to
cultivate creativity and social responsibility in society.  The DVD
contains carefully curated applications starting from primary school
to graduate level. The DVD is being distributed to students and
teachers across the country. The lab conducted more than 25 hands-on
workshops based on the DVD across the country. The applications are
customÂ­ized as a part of a free and open source GNU/Linux operating
system. NCERT has adopted the DVD for nationwide distribution and
developing the ICT courses for schools across the country.  The
Learning Studios DVD eventually included the sugar learning platform
which runs on the One Laptop Per Child (OLPC).

![DVD Cover of Learning Studios](https://metastudio.org/uploads/default/original/2X/a/adb8c5ba5ac40d82fb71ba9b709fe4718dc126d9.png)
