--- 

layout: default
title: Gnowledge Manifesto
description: of gnowledge lab of Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education, TIFR
---

From Thiruvananthapuram Declaration

**FREE SOFTWARE, FREE SOCIETY**

**The Thiruvananthapuram Declaration**

**May 29, 2005**

We are currently living in a world that is increasingly getting
interconnected and the issues of our concern are becoming
global. Along the way, new Information and Communication Technologies
(ICTs) transformed the process of knowledge construction and
dissemination in our society. This process is transforming other
fields of human creativity as well — including music, painting or
writing. Human history is calling us to take note of this
change. Creative works today live in a digital world, travel at the
speed of light, get transformed in seconds, become part of several
other creations, and grow in a number of other ways.

As society transforms drastically, we — students, engineers, IT
professionals, social activists, lawyers, elected public
representatives, media persons, film-makers and concerned citizens —
urge our world to take note of the immense potential opening up for
humanity, and to ensure that technology is harnessed in the needs of
the time to tackle the wider concerns of our planet.

Free Software has convincingly demonstrated to the world we know that
knowledge building is enhanced by freedom, openness and social
consciousness; and that such features are very effective in creating a
fairer society and enhance the cause of the social good.

In the new networked and digitized society, the intangible
(non-materialistic) aspects of reality are becoming more important in
comparison with the material ones. Several years of materialcentered
development has not helped humanity to create a better world for all;
or even for the majority on this planet.

To face the challenges of the day, we need a new model of development
centered around non material aspects of life —including collaboration,
sharing, and compassion. Such a society is evolving today on the
foundations of freedom, collaboration and shared knowledge.

We call it the gnowledge society (see
[http://www.gnowledge.org](http://web.archive.org/web/20060901193802/http://www.gnowledge.org/)).

In our view, the gnowledge society will and must prefer: freedom over
bondage; sharing over monopoly; public good over private profit;
participation over exclusion; cooperation over competition; diversity
over uniformity.

We find that patent, copyright and other legal and institutional
systems related to human knowledge are not suitable for the
development of the gnowledge society. These systems were created
during the industrial revolution, and then continued in spite of major
changes in how technology shapes our lives. These systems were not
designed for, and therefore cannot cater to, the emerging gnowledge
society. For the development of human society, it is imperative that
we promote the collaborative development and free sharing of
knowledge.

Such principles are not only consistent with, but even mandated 
by, the spirit of human rights as defined by the present legal system.

We, the participants at the Free Software, Free Society conference in
Thiruvananthapuram underline the following:

We call upon the social and political institutions to eliminate
systems that hinder the development of the gnowledge society.

We demand that every human being works for a more fair distribution of
knowledge for all, and for a world based on knowledge sharing and
collaboration.

Agreed upon in Thiruvananthapuram, South India, amongst the
participants at the Free Software, Free Society Conference, by
participants from the countries of: Bangladesh, Brazil, India, Italy,
Norway Uruguay Venezuela.
