--- 
layout: default
title: Research Projects
---
<!---{% include menu.html %}--->
## {{ page.title }}
# Concept Mapping

Re-representation of knowledge in non-linear network forms such as
concept mapping are known to help in meaningful learning. We refined
this technique to help students develop rigour over-and-above
meaningful learning, called Refined Concept Mapping. This technique
focuses more on the predicate space of knowledge representation, which
is necessary because models used in science deal with variable
properties and relations between them rather than simple linkages
between objects. The technique was developed through field studies
involving teachers and students. The work is published in
international concept mapping and computer science forums with focus
on education. 

# Shared Memory Space

## Instant Messaging as a constructionist social learning context (Rafikh Shaikh)

A collaborative framework was also found to be effective for primary
school children in Rafikh's study.  In this study instant messaging
(chatting) through networked computers (using OLPC) was used to
facilitate numeracy and literacy skills.  The study demonstrated the
effective use of externalized shared memory in a collaborative and
competitive (game like) setting promoting accelerated learning as well
as building motivation. Using a very similar research framework as
that which was adopted for Shraddha, we began to study primary school
children's mathematics learning in a constructionist social learning
environment.  In this ongoing study we used an instant messaging
(chat) application designed on wireless-networked computers in a rural
school (Khairat) for facilitating both numeracy and literacy
skills. The chatting game turned out to be a highly engaging and
popular activity among the primary school students. This research
applies a situated cognitive constructionist framework to design and
deploy studio based learning contexts in science education. [18]

The gnowledge lab took a pioneering role in supporting the pilot
implementations of the One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) project in Goa and
Khairat village in Raigad district.  This is being done in
collaboration with Digital Bridge Foundation.  Khairat is the first
OLPC implementation in India.  OLPC and the Sugar Learning Platform
(SLP) is explicitly designed on the basis of the studio based
contructionist philosophy of Symour Papert by his colleagues at MIT.
SLP is produced by geeks, with several contributions from the learning
students who became makers themselves, at http://sugarlabs.org/.
Walter Bender a leading hacker of the SLP who visited gnowledge lab in
2012.  The bottomline of this project is: learning and making can
happen together.  Gnowledge lab intends to transform this machine so
as to rewrite the bottomline into: Learning, making and investigation
can happen together in a studio environment.

