--- 
layout: default
title: STEM Education Projects
description: of Gnowledge Lab of HBCSE, TIFR
---
<!---{% include menu.html %}--->



![STEMGames Logo](https://metastudio.org/uploads/default/original/1X/39d3aab369cc8f9235f8ca03bc57a2e2418867d4.png)
# COOOL STEMGames

STEMGames is an online platform teacher, students, educators,
researchers, parents, or any citizen can collectively participate in
the process of knowledge construction via participating in discussion
and project challenges. It's a collaborative Platform for Open Online
and Ongoing Learning to nurture research practices.  We publish
STEM(Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) projects
periodically, which are specially designed to inculcate STEM habits
among participants. This platform is developed keeping in mind [21st
Century Learning
Goals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/21st_century_skills).

[Read full details of STEMGames](https://www.gnowledge.org/projects/stemgames.html)

[Visit and Learn more about the live platform](https://stemgames.metastudio.org/)


# MakerSpace 
Expanding the participatory base of science depends on the
availability of accessible, functional labs and field programs in
schools and colleges. Most Indian schools do not have science,
mathematics and computer labs. In those schools where the labs exist,
they are often not functional. In the colleges where labs exist, they
were mostly used for clearing practical examinations and not for
performing authentic scientific experiments. As a result, providing an
authentic exposure to scientific practices is almost impossible given
the current emphasis on the nature of laboratory practicals in the
curriculum.

![An Image of MakerSpace](https://metastudio.org/uploads/default/optimized/2X/e/efda8e63889c7699d842df359c34d433922506bd_2_517x238.png)

This project proposes to remedy the situation by developing
activity-based professional development of teachers (particularly
science teachers) by exposing them to ways to create, manage and use
the labs and field explorations (open citizen science projects). This
exposure and training will be conducted by developing and delivering
Activity Based Collaborative Distributed Massive Open Online Courses
(in short ABCD MOOCs).  Unlike traditional courses, these are ongoing
courses that will be integrated with the teacher professional
development programs (in-service teacher training) by involving
students.  The courses will focus on generic and transferable
competencies such as fabrication, tinkering, data collection,
measurement, calibration, analysis, data visualization, knowledge
organization, asking questions, designing experiments, modeling,
model-based reasoning, seeking evidence, publication and
communication.

[Read full details about MakerSpace](https://www.gnowledge.org/projects/makerspace.html)


# CUBE

![CUBE Logo](https://metastudio.org/uploads/default/original/2X/2/2612883b207547b399ce35d634727c38c4793f0d.png)

CUBE: Collaboratively Understanding Biology Education, is currently,
in the 8th year of operation, this project expanded in its scale and
continued to encourage and inspire us.  As a demonstration of the
pedagogical principles designed as a part of the gnowledge lab, CUBE
initiative stands out as one of our major integrated initiatives, that
has multiple implications to STEM education in the country.

![CUBE participants](https://stemgames.metastudio.org/uploads/default/optimized/2X/f/f1ca6b78917f085c44c4d4d1b97ad490cc3db4c3_2_608x500.png)

[Read full details about CUBE](https://www.gnowledge.org/projects/cube.html)

# CLIx: Connected Learning Initiative 

Connected Learning Initiative (CLIx) a multi-partner project funded by
Tata Trusts and coordinated by Tata Institute of Social Sciences.
Arguably one of the most extensive field-based research study on the
ICT based Science, Mathematics, and Language teaching in Govt Schools
in four different states in India (Telangana, Rajasthan, Chattisgarh,
and Mizoram).  The project started in 2015, the first phase of the
project will end in March 2019.  The project so far is executed in
about 600 schools across the country.  The project started with an
online course (delivered through LAN in the school’s computer lab)
developed for school students, Invitation to Connected Learning Environment (i2c) 
was deployed in the field through a marathon of workshops conducted in 
three different states. The was developed in three languages, English, 
Hindi, and Telugu. We deployed, in collaboration with CLIx team, 
in about 600 schools, trained several hundred teachers trained about 
35 technical field support personnel.   

After the successful run of the online course Invitation to CLIx using
the GStudio server during the first half of the year, it was decided
to use GStudio for other courses developed by other partners of CLIx.
As a result, it transformed into CLIx Course Platform for all
courses. During this process, we started collaborating with Office of
the Digital Learning at MIT Boston, which is a core partner of the
CLIx project. We reached an agreement that MIT team will develop Open
Assessment Tool for authoring questions as well as Open Assessment
Player to administer them.  We successfully integrated these
components to run with GStudio environment using an open standard
interface called DLKIT (Digital Learning Kit) which is a Python
binding for OSID (Open Service Interface Definitions).  MIT provided
the DLKIT and test cases supporting the integration process. These
developments gave GStudio the ability to embed assessments, generate
analytics to track learners performance.  During this period both the
team members visited each other’s labs for face to face coordination
and regular conference calls between the MIT team and the team at the
gnowledge lab.  The platform is continuously updated and is available
online at [https://clixplatform.tiss.edu/](https://clixplatform.tiss.edu/), and the code is published at
[https://github.com/gnowledge/gstudio](https://github.com/gnowledge/gstudio) as DLKIT branch.
The main contribution of the gnowledge lab has been to develop the software of the platform based on the flagship project of the lab (GStudio).

![CLIx Platform Installed in over 540 schools across 4 states in India](https://metastudio.org/uploads/default/original/2X/0/0ce360844572fdafb71237260944c8f77e16f69e.jpeg)

The multi-partner CLIx project was awarded the **UNESCO King Hamad Bin
Isa Al-Khalifa ICT in Education for the year 2017**.  Award received
2018. 

CLIx also won **Open Collaboration Award for Excellence 2019** from
the Open Education Consortium (OEC). The award says: "A bold and
innovative intervention with global relevance to improve the quality
of teaching and learning in the public education systems in India. The
overarching goal is to demonstrate quality at scale through meaningful
use of new media and digital technologies in resource constrained
contexts."

Gnowledge lab at HBCSE contributes to the CLIx by advising and
assisting CLIx technology team for the design, development,
integration and deployment of CLIx platform – a next generation
digital learning platform which is both a course maker (CMS) and a
course player (LMS). The CLIx platform is powered by gstudio, which is
a node based framework for learning technologies developed at the
Gnowledge lab. The platform hosts all the CLIx students modules and
works both online as well as offline. The lab also developed
installation technology for distribution of the platform in the remote
schools which fosters connected learning in disconnected spaces
through the concept of internet in a box. The team at HBCSE
collaborates with MIT technology team to integrate the Open Assessment
Tool and Open Assessment Client with the platform. The Gnowledge lab
is also involved in the CLIx OER release.

The HBCSE has contributed to CLIx in the design and development of i2C
– a digital literacy course for high school students. The HBCSE staff
actively contribute towards the technology transfer to CLIx
implementation teams by conducting workshops, training teachers and
providing technical support on an ongoing basis.

[Read full details about CLIx](https://www.gnowledge.org/projects/clix.html)
